=========================
About LaunchCode Programs
=========================

Goals
=====

We want our programs to help you build your problem solving skills and
encourage you to learn how to learn. Whether you use the coding skills you gain
in this program to get a job as a developer is up to you. However, no matter
the path you take after this program, learning how to learn will help you
continually adapt to the changing needs of your industry.

To get you ready for a career in technology, our goal is to teach you the
skills found in a wide variety of industries.

Blended learning
================

.. index:: ! blended learning model

We only have a short amount of time in class to learn a lot, so using a
**blended learning model** helps us make the most of our time in this class. A
blended learning model incorporates in-class learning with online materials
such as this textbook.

Course activities
=================

We have spent a lot of time creating the course activities to make the most of
your in-class and out-of-class time. While there are a lot of different
activities we will do in a day, it is important to actively engage with each
activity. Skipping the prep work or falling behind on assignments can quickly
lead to struggling in the class.

Prep Work
---------

Prep Work is done before each class session and covers the topics that you will
learn about that day. In addition to reading, prep work includes small
questions that can help you reinforce your understanding of what you have just
read. We have found that studying the material before class helps students make
the most of their short in-class time.

Exercises
---------

Exercises are small coding problems and are a chance for you to implement what
you have just learned. While exercises do not count towards your final grade in
the class, it is essential to practice in order to reinforce your understanding
of the new concepts.


In-class Time
-------------

In class you will meet many fellow students on the same learning journey as
you. We encourage students to engage, interact, and encourage each other
throughout the class.

In class there will also be an instructor and teaching assistants. This
dedicated staff facilitates the activities and provides support to the
students.

Large Group Time
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

During the large group time, the whole class participates in the lesson, led by
the instructor. The lesson is not a substitute for doing the prep work before
class. It's a time for us to review examples as a group and shore up concepts
from the prep work.

Small Group Time
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

After the large group time, we will break up into small groups, each led by a
teaching assistant. During small group time, we will do in-class coding
activities called studios. This time is equally as important as large group
time because it is time for individual support and a place where you can feel
comfortable talking openly about concepts you are struggling with.


Assignments
-----------

Assignments are larger projects where you demonstrate what you have learned and
challenge yourself. Assignments oftentimes cover multiple lessons.

Canvas
=======

LaunchCode monitors your progress in this class through a management system
called *Canvas*. It provides a central location to manage the flow of
information, but it does not hold the actual course content. Instead, it links
to the lessons you need, and it keeps a record of your completed assignments
and scores.

Now that you are enrolled, you can access the course content
at `<https://learn.launchcode.org/>`__.

After logging in, you will arrive at your *dashboard*, which displays the
LaunchCode courses you can access, upcoming due dates, and several menu items.

.. figure:: figures/canvas-signup&dashboard.png
   :alt: Canvas sign-in and dashboard views

Clicking on a course title takes you to that class' homepage, which shows
upcoming due dates, announcements, general information, and menu options. You
will probably use the *Syllabus* and *Assignments* options the most often.

.. figure:: figures/canvas-class-menu.png
   :alt: Canvas class menu options

Syllabus Page
--------------

The syllabus page provides general information such as a description of the
class, the timeline for the course, a calendar, and a To Do list. Scrolling
down on the page shows the "Course Summary", which holds links to individual
tasks (reading, quizzes, assignments, etc.).

This page is a good place to answer the questions *What do I need to do next*,
and *How can I quickly find and review an old topic*.

.. figure:: figures/course-syllabus-page.png
   :alt: Course Summary list

Assignments Page
-----------------

This page sorts required tasks by date or type. A few days before each class
session, new tasks will appear on the list. Old content remains active,
allowing you to use the links for reference and review.

.. figure:: figures/course-assignments-page.png
   :alt: Course assignment view

Clicking on a specific title brings up information about that task, including
the due date, points possible, instructions, and links.

.. figure:: figures/assignment-examples.png
   :alt: Sample task instructions

Even though much of the course content can be accessed without logging in, the
best choice is to begin from within Canvas. That way your progress gets
recorded, and your scores will update smoothly as you complete quizzes. Also,
submitting files for the larger assignments should only be done through Canvas.
